.TH LIST-MODELS 1 "2026-03-01" "model-quantizer" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
list-models \- list cached Hugging Face models with size and quantization info
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B list-models
.RI [ cache-dir ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B list-models
scans the Hugging Face cache directory and prints each cached model with its
disk size, snapshot count, and detected quantization type (if any).
.PP
Models are discovered by scanning for
.B models\-\-*
directories under the
.B hub/
subdirectory of the cache root.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I cache-dir
HF cache root directory to scan. Default:
.B $MODEL_CACHE_DIR
or
.BR ./models .
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage information and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MODEL_CACHE_DIR
Default cache directory. Overridden by the positional
.I cache-dir
argument. Default:
.BR ./models .
.SH OUTPUT
A header line is printed first, followed by a blank line:
.PP
.RS
.nf
Model cache: \fI/path/to/cache\fP

.fi
.RE
.PP
Then one indented line per model in the format:
.PP
.RS
.nf
  \fIorg/model-name\fP  (\fIsize\fP, \fIN\fP snapshot(s)) [\fIquant-type\fP]
.fi
.RE
.PP
The quantization type tag is detected from
.B config.json
in the first snapshot directory (by glob order). Detected types:
.TP
.B [compressed-tensors]
LLM Compressor / compressed-tensors format (vLLM native).
.TP
.B [AWQ]
Activation-aware weight quantization.
.TP
.B [FP8-TORCHAO]
TorchAO quantization (detected via
.B quant_method
containing "torchao" in config.json).
.TP
.B [quantized]
Other quantization (detected via
.B quant_type
or
.B quantization_config
in config.json).
.PP
If no models are cached, prints
.BR "(no models cached)" .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B >0
Unexpected error (the script uses
.BR "set -euo pipefail" ,
so any command failure causes a non-zero exit).
.SH EXAMPLES
List models in the default cache:
.PP
.RS
.nf
list-models
.fi
.RE
.PP
List models in a custom cache directory:
.PP
.RS
.nf
list-models /data/hf-cache
.fi
.RE
.PP
Use with an environment variable:
.PP
.RS
.nf
MODEL_CACHE_DIR=/mnt/shared/models list-models
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR quantize-awq (1),
.BR quantize-fp8 (1),
.BR quantize-llmc (1)
