.TH QUANTIZE-LLMC 1 "2026-03-01" "model-quantizer" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
quantize-llmc \- quantize models using vLLM's LLM Compressor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B quantize-llmc
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.I model-id-or-path
.RI [ scheme ]
.RB [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B quantize-llmc
quantizes a Hugging Face model using the LLM Compressor
.RB ( llmcompressor )
library. Output is a
.B compressed-tensors
checkpoint that vLLM can load directly.
.PP
Four quantization schemes are supported:
.TP
.B fp8
FP8 quantization (data-free by default). Uses
.B QuantizationModifier
with the
.B FP8_DYNAMIC
or
.B FP8_BLOCK
scheme. Optionally supports model-free PTQ pathway.
.TP
.B gptq
W4A16 GPTQ quantization (calibration-based). Uses
.BR GPTQModifier .
.TP
.B w8a8
W8A8 SmoothQuant + GPTQ quantization (calibration-based). Uses
.B SmoothQuantModifier
followed by
.BR GPTQModifier .
.TP
.B nvfp4
NVFP4 quantization (calibration-based). Uses
.B QuantizationModifier
with the
.B NVFP4
scheme.
.PP
The tool operates offline by default. Network access can be enabled with
.BR \-\-online .
.PP
Before quantizing, the tool checks for at least 512 MB of free GPU VRAM. If
insufficient memory is available, it exits with an error.
.PP
Concurrent runs are serialized via
.BR flock (1)
on a per-output lockfile.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS "Quantization Options"
.TP
.BI \-\-fp8\-scheme " NAME"
FP8 scheme:
.B dynamic
or
.BR block .
Default:
.BR dynamic .
Maps to
.B FP8_DYNAMIC
or
.BR FP8_BLOCK .
.TP
.BI \-\-fp8\-pathway " NAME"
FP8 pathway:
.B oneshot
or
.BR model_free .
Default:
.BR oneshot .
The
.B model_free
pathway requires a local model path and llmcompressor >= 0.9.0.
.TP
.BI \-\-ignore " LIST"
Extra layer name patterns to exclude from quantization (comma-separated).
May be repeated. The
.B lm_head
layer is always excluded.
.TP
.BI \-\-model\-free\-device " STR"
Device for
.B model_free_ptq
pathway. Default:
.BR cuda:0 .
.TP
.BI \-\-model\-free\-workers " N"
Worker count for
.B model_free_ptq
pathway. Default:
.BR 8 .
.SS "Calibration Options"
These apply to schemes that require calibration (gptq, w8a8, nvfp4):
.TP
.BI \-\-num\-samples " N"
Number of calibration samples. Default:
.BR 512 .
.TP
.BI \-\-seq\-length " N"
Maximum sequence length for calibration. Default:
.BR 2048 .
.TP
.BI \-\-batch\-size " N"
Calibration batch size. Default:
.BR 1 .
.TP
.BI \-\-dataset " NAME"
HF dataset identifier for calibration. Default:
.BR open_platypus .
.TP
.BI \-\-dataset\-config " NAME"
HF dataset config name (optional).
.TP
.BI \-\-dataset\-path " PATH"
Local dataset path. Accepts a file (.json, .jsonl, .csv, .parquet), a
directory containing one of those types, or a
.B dvc://
URI. For local files, the dataset is loaded via the
.B datasets
library.
.TP
.BI \-\-text\-column " KEY"
Dataset text column name. Default:
.BR text .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-shuffle
Do not shuffle calibration samples.
.TP
.BI \-\-seed " N"
RNG seed for reproducibility. Default:
.BR 1234 .
.SS "Pipeline Options"
.TP
.BI \-\-pipeline " NAME"
Oneshot pipeline type:
.BR basic ", " datafree ", " sequential ", or " independent .
Default: llmcompressor's internal default.
.TP
.BI \-\-sequential\-targets " LIST"
Comma-separated list of decoder layer class names for sequential
processing.
.TP
.BI \-\-sequential\-offload " DEVICE"
Offload device between sequential layers. Default:
.BR cpu .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-qac
Disable quantization-aware calibration.
.SS "Streaming and Dataset Workers"
.TP
.B \-\-streaming
Stream the dataset (only for hub ID or dvc:// paths; requires
.BR \-\-online ).
.TP
.BI \-\-splits " SPEC"
Split percentages specification passed to
.BR oneshot .
.TP
.BI \-\-preprocessing\-workers " N"
Dataset preprocessing workers. Unset by default.
.TP
.BI \-\-dataloader\-workers " N"
DataLoader workers. Default:
.BR 0 .
.SS "Model and Cache Options"
.TP
.BI \-\-model\-revision " REV"
HF model revision (branch, tag, or commit hash). Default:
.BR main .
.TP
.B \-\-use\-auth\-token
Use Hugging Face authentication (for private repositories).
.TP
.B \-\-trust\-remote\-code
Allow custom code from the model repository.
.TP
.B \-\-online
Allow network access (default: offline).
.SS "Output and Validation Options"
.TP
.BI \-\-suffix " STR"
Override the output model ID suffix. Defaults are scheme-dependent:
.BR \-FP8\-DYNAMIC ", " \-FP8\-BLOCK ", " \-W4A16\-GPTQ ", " \-W8A8\-SQ\-GPTQ ", " \-NVFP4 .
.TP
.B \-\-force
Overwrite existing output.
.TP
.BI \-\-lock\-timeout " SECONDS"
Lock wait time for concurrent runs.
.B 0
means fail immediately if locked (default).
.B \-1
waits without limit.
.TP
.B \-\-validate
After quantization, load the output in vLLM and run smoke test prompts.
Runs in a separate process to avoid VRAM residue.
.TP
.BI \-\-validate\-prompt " TEXT"
Prompt for the validation smoke test. Default:
.BR Hello! .
.TP
.BI \-\-validate\-suite " PATH"
Path to a JSONL or plain-text file with prompts for a regression suite.
JSONL schema per line (all fields optional):
.BR "{\(dqprompt\(dq: \(dq...\(dq, \(dqmax_tokens\(dq: 64, \(dqmin_chars\(dq: 1, \(dqmust_contain\(dq: [\(dq...\(dq]}" .
.TP
.BI \-\-validate\-seed " N"
Seed for vLLM sampling during validation. Default:
.BR 1 .
.TP
.BI \-\-validate\-max\-tokens " N"
Maximum tokens per prompt during validation. Default:
.BR 64 .
.TP
.BI \-\-validate\-min\-chars " N"
Minimum output characters to count as a pass. Default:
.BR 1 .
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-dir " PATH"
LLM Compressor log directory (optional).
.TP
.B \-\-json
JSON output mode. Progress is sent to stderr; a single JSON result object is
printed on stdout.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MODEL_CACHE_DIR
HF cache root. Default:
.BR ./models .
.TP
.B QUANTIZED_OUTPUT_DIR
Output root. Default: same as
.BR MODEL_CACHE_DIR .
.TP
.B WRITE_LOCAL_REPO_LAYOUT
Set to
.B 1
for HF-cache-shaped output layout
.RB ( hub/models\-\-\fI...\fP/snapshots/\fIhash\fP
with refs). Default:
.BR 0 .
.SH OUTPUT
Output depends on the
.B WRITE_LOCAL_REPO_LAYOUT
setting:
.PP
Plain layout (default, slashes in model ID are replaced with
.BR \-\- ):
.RS
.nf
$QUANTIZED_OUTPUT_DIR/<model-id-slug><suffix>/
  config.json
  *.safetensors
  tokenizer files
  quantize_info.json
.fi
.RE
.PP
Cache-shaped layout (WRITE_LOCAL_REPO_LAYOUT=1):
.RS
.nf
$QUANTIZED_OUTPUT_DIR/hub/models--<model-id-slug><suffix>/
  refs/main
  snapshots/<hash>/
    (same files as above)
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B quantize_info.json
records the source model, scheme, versions, calibration parameters, and
runtime metadata.
.PP
The default output suffix depends on the scheme:
.TP
.B fp8 (dynamic)
\-FP8\-DYNAMIC
.TP
.B fp8 (block)
\-FP8\-BLOCK
.TP
.B gptq
\-W4A16\-GPTQ
.TP
.B w8a8
\-W8A8\-SQ\-GPTQ
.TP
.B nvfp4
\-NVFP4
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success, or output already exists.
.TP
.B 1
Error from the bash layer or an unhandled Python exception. The shell
.B die()
handler exits 1 for: unknown options, missing model-id, unknown scheme,
invalid integer arguments, missing
.BR flock (1),
lock contention, and streaming-in-offline-mode. The VRAM preflight check
(a Python subprocess) also exits 1 on failure. Unhandled Python exceptions
(e.g.,
.BR RuntimeError )
propagate as exit code 1.
.TP
.B 2
Python preflight or sanity-check error: missing dependencies, version too
old, offline model/dataset not cached, output sanity check failure (missing
config.json or weight files).
.TP
.B 3
Validation failure (vLLM smoke test did not pass). Only returned when
.B \-\-validate
is used.
.SH EXAMPLES
FP8 dynamic quantization (data-free, default):
.PP
.RS
.nf
quantize-llmc meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B
.fi
.RE
.PP
GPTQ W4A16 with custom calibration:
.PP
.RS
.nf
quantize-llmc meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B gptq \\
  --num-samples 256 --seq-length 4096 \\
  --dataset-path ./calib-data.jsonl
.fi
.RE
.PP
W8A8 SmoothQuant with online access and validation:
.PP
.RS
.nf
quantize-llmc --online --validate \\
  meta-llama/Llama-3.1-70B w8a8
.fi
.RE
.PP
NVFP4 with JSON output and sequential pipeline:
.PP
.RS
.nf
quantize-llmc --json --pipeline sequential \\
  --sequential-targets LlamaDecoderLayer \\
  meta-llama/Llama-3.1-70B nvfp4
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR quantize-awq (1),
.BR quantize-fp8 (1),
.BR list-models (1)
