.TH QUANTIZE-FP8 1 "2026-03-01" "model-quantizer" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
quantize-fp8 \- convert a Hugging Face model to FP8 weight-only quantization via TorchAO
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B quantize-fp8
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.I model-id
.RB [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B quantize-fp8
performs FP8 E4M3FN weight-only quantization on a Hugging Face causal language
model using
.BR torchao.quantization.Float8WeightOnlyConfig .
This is a data-free quantization method (no calibration dataset required).
.PP
The quantized checkpoint is saved under an HF-cache-like layout with a
deterministic snapshot ID derived from the model, commit, and configuration.
.PP
The tool operates offline by default. Network access can be enabled with
.BR \-\-online .
If a complete output already exists for the same parameters, the tool exits
successfully without re-quantizing (unless
.B \-\-force
is passed).
.PP
When targeting a GPU device, the tool checks for at least 512 MB of free
VRAM before proceeding. If insufficient memory is available, it exits with
an error suggesting
.BR "\-\-device cpu" .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-c " DIR" "\fR,\fP \-\-cache\-dir " DIR
HF cache root directory. Default:
.B $MODEL_CACHE_DIR
or
.BR ./models .
.TP
.BI \-o " DIR" "\fR,\fP \-\-output\-dir " DIR
Output root directory. Default:
.B $QUANTIZED_OUTPUT_DIR
or same as cache dir.
.TP
.BI \-r " REV" "\fR,\fP \-\-revision " REV
HF revision to load (branch, tag, or commit hash). Default:
.BR main .
.TP
.BI \-\-device " MODE"
Device mode:
.BR auto ", " cpu ", or " cuda .
Default:
.BR auto .
.TP
.B \-\-online
Allow network access (default: offline).
.TP
.B \-\-trust\-remote\-code
Allow custom code from the model repository.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Rebuild even if a matching snapshot already exists. The old snapshot is
backed up during the build and removed on success.
.TP
.BI \-\-suffix " STR"
Output model ID suffix. Default:
.BR \-FP8\-TORCHAO .
.TP
.BI \-\-format " FMT"
Checkpoint format:
.B torch
or
.BR safetensors .
Default:
.BR torch .
.TP
.B \-\-allow\-safetensors
Enable safetensors output; implies
.BR "\-\-format safetensors" .
Experimental.
.TP
.B \-\-offline\-pick\-latest
In offline mode, if refs are missing, pick the newest cached snapshot.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-validate
Skip structural validation of the output checkpoint.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-validate\-quant
Skip quantization coverage validation (checking that Linear layers were
quantized).
.TP
.BI \-\-quant\-min\-ratio " FLOAT"
Minimum fraction of Linear layers that must be quantized to pass coverage
validation. Default:
.BR 0.80 .
.TP
.B \-\-validate\-zip\-crc
For
.B .bin
shards stored as zip, run zip CRC checks. Slow. Default: off.
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-shard\-size " STR"
Pass through to
.BR save_pretrained(max_shard_size=...) .
Unset by default.
.TP
.BI \-\-lock\-ttl\-seconds " N"
Lock TTL for cross-host stale lock handling. Default:
.B 21600
(6 hours).
.TP
.B \-\-smoke\-test
After quantization, load the output checkpoint and run a tiny generation
test.
.TP
.BI \-\-smoke\-prompt " STR"
Prompt text for the smoke test. Default:
.BR Hello .
.TP
.BI \-\-smoke\-max\-new\-tokens " N"
Tokens to generate in the smoke test. Default:
.BR 1 .
.TP
.BI \-\-smoke\-temperature " F"
Sampling temperature for the smoke test. Default:
.BR 0.0 .
.TP
.B \-\-json
JSON output mode. Progress is sent to stderr; a single JSON result object is
printed on stdout.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MODEL_CACHE_DIR
Default cache directory. Overridden by
.BR \-\-cache\-dir .
Default:
.BR ./models .
.TP
.B QUANTIZED_OUTPUT_DIR
Default output directory. Overridden by
.BR \-\-output\-dir .
Default: same as cache dir.
.TP
.B MIN_TORCH_VERSION
Minimum required PyTorch version. Default:
.BR 2.1.0 .
.TP
.B MIN_TRANSFORMERS_VERSION
Minimum required transformers version. Default:
.BR 4.40.0 .
.TP
.B MIN_TORCHAO_VERSION
Minimum required torchao version. Default:
.BR 0.10.0 .
.SH OUTPUT
Output is written in an HF-cache-like layout:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$OUTPUT_DIR/hub/models--<model-id><suffix>/
  refs/main
  refs/<revision>
  snapshots/<snapshot-hash>/
    config.json
    *.bin (or *.safetensors)
    tokenizer_config.json
    tokenizer.json (or tokenizer.model)
    quantize_meta.json
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B config.json
is patched with
.B quant_method
and
.B quant_type
fields for vLLM compatibility.
.B quantize_meta.json
records source model, versions, quantization config, and runtime metadata.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success, or output already exists.
.TP
.B 1
Error from the bash layer. The
.B die()
handler exits 1 for all shell-level errors: unknown options, missing
model-id, CUDA/VRAM unavailable, lock contention, disk space, offline
mode failures. Also returned by Python for unhandled exceptions (e.g.,
quant coverage
.B RuntimeError
).
.TP
.B 2
Python preflight or validation error: missing dependencies, version too old,
invalid numeric flag values, structural validation failure (missing
config.json, missing weight files).
.TP
.B 4
API error (hub commit resolution returned no sha).
.SH EXAMPLES
Quantize a model with defaults (offline, auto device):
.PP
.RS
.nf
quantize-fp8 meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B
.fi
.RE
.PP
Quantize with online access and smoke test:
.PP
.RS
.nf
quantize-fp8 --online --smoke-test meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B
.fi
.RE
.PP
Quantize to safetensors format with JSON output:
.PP
.RS
.nf
quantize-fp8 --json --allow-safetensors \\
  meta-llama/Llama-3.1-70B
.fi
.RE
.PP
Force rebuild with custom shard size:
.PP
.RS
.nf
quantize-fp8 --force --max-shard-size 2GB \\
  -r abc123def456... meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR quantize-awq (1),
.BR quantize-llmc (1),
.BR list-models (1)
