.TH QUANTIZE-AWQ 1 "2026-03-01" "model-quantizer" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
quantize-awq \- quantize a Hugging Face model to AWQ format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B quantize-awq
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.RB [ \-\-smoke\-test " {" full | fast | off }]
.I model-id
.RI [ bits ]
.RI [ group-size ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B quantize-awq
performs activation-aware weight quantization (AWQ) on a Hugging Face causal
language model using the AutoAWQ library. The quantized model is saved in a
deterministic, content-addressed output directory.
.PP
The tool operates offline by default (no network access). It requires a
pre-cached model in the HF cache directory. CUDA is required by default
but can be disabled.
.PP
If a complete output already exists for the same parameters, the tool exits
successfully without re-quantizing (unless
.B FORCE_REQUANTIZE=1
is set).
.PP
Output integrity is verified via a fingerprint-based snapshot ID and an
optional smoke test (forward pass + tiny generation).
.PP
When targeting a GPU device, the tool checks for at least 512 MB of free
VRAM before proceeding. If insufficient memory is available, it exits with
an error suggesting
.BR DEVICE_MAP=cpu .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-json
JSON output mode. Progress is sent to stderr; a single JSON object is
printed on stdout upon completion.
.TP
.BI \-\-smoke\-test " mode"
Validation mode after quantization. Accepted values:
.RS
.TP
.B full
Reload saved artifact from disk and run a forward pass plus tiny generate
(default).
.TP
.B fast
Run forward pass and tiny generate on the in-memory model immediately
after quantization (skips reload).
.TP
.B off
Skip forward/generate checks. Structural file checks still run.
.RE
.TP
.I model-id
Required. Hugging Face model identifier (e.g.,
.BR meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B ).
.TP
.I bits
Quantization bit width. Integer between 2 and 8. Default:
.BR 4 .
.TP
.I group-size
Quantization group size. Positive integer. Default:
.BR 128 .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MODEL_CACHE_DIR
Base HF cache directory. Default:
.BR ./models .
.TP
.B QUANTIZED_OUTPUT_DIR
Base output directory. Default:
.BR $MODEL_CACHE_DIR/quantized .
.TP
.B MODEL_REVISION
HF revision (tag, branch, or 40-hex commit). Default:
.BR main .
.TP
.B HF_OFFLINE
Set to
.B 1
for cache-only loads (no network). Default:
.BR 1 .
.TP
.B TRUST_REMOTE_CODE
Set to
.B 1
to enable
.B trust_remote_code
when loading models. Default:
.BR 0 .
.TP
.B FORCE_REQUANTIZE
Set to
.B 1
to remove existing output and re-quantize. Default:
.BR 0 .
.TP
.B SHOW_SIZES
Set to
.B 1
to print source/output size statistics. Default:
.BR 0 .
.TP
.B PYTHON
Python executable to use. Default:
.BR python3 .
.TP
.B REQUIRE_CUDA
Set to
.B 1
to fail if CUDA is unavailable. Default:
.BR 1 .
.TP
.B DEVICE_MAP
Device mapping strategy:
.BR auto ", " cuda0 ", or " cpu .
Default: auto-detected (cuda0 if CUDA available, else cpu).
.TP
.B WRITE_LOCAL_REPO_LAYOUT
Set to
.B 1
to write output in HF cache-shaped layout
.RB ( hub/models\-\-\fI...\fP/snapshots/\fIhash\fP ).
Default:
.BR 0
(plain directory layout).
.TP
.B LOCK_TIMEOUT_SECONDS
Seconds to wait for the output lock. 0 means fail immediately if locked.
Default:
.BR 0 .
.TP
.B LOCK_METHOD
Lock mechanism:
.BR auto ", " flock ", or " mkdir .
Default:
.BR auto .
.TP
.B LOCK_STALE_SECONDS
If greater than 0, stale lock directories older than this many seconds can
be removed when the owning PID is dead, or when the PID has been reused
(detected via
.B /proc/$pid/stat
start-time mismatch on Linux). Default:
.BR 0 .
.TP
.B ALLOW_REMOTE_STALE
Set to
.B 1
to allow stale-lock cleanup across hosts on shared storage. Default:
.BR 0 .
.TP
.B AWQ_CALIB_DATASET
Calibration dataset name (string). Passed to AutoAWQ if set.
.TP
.B AWQ_MAX_CALIB_SAMPLES
Maximum calibration samples (integer). Passed to AutoAWQ if set.
.TP
.B AWQ_MAX_CALIB_SEQ_LEN
Maximum calibration sequence length (integer). Passed to AutoAWQ if set.
.TP
.B AWQ_N_PARALLEL_CALIB_SAMPLES
Parallel calibration samples (integer). Passed to AutoAWQ if set.
.TP
.B AWQ_CALIB_SAMPLES
Back-compat alias for
.BR AWQ_MAX_CALIB_SAMPLES .
.TP
.B AWQ_CALIB_SEQ_LEN
Back-compat alias for
.BR AWQ_MAX_CALIB_SEQ_LEN .
.TP
.B QUANT_SEED
RNG seed for reproducibility (non-negative integer). Default:
.BR 1337 .
.TP
.B DETERMINISTIC
Set to
.B 1
to request deterministic CUDA algorithms. Default:
.BR 0 .
.TP
.B DETERMINISTIC_FAIL_CLOSED
Set to
.B 1
to make determinism setup errors fatal (0 logs warning and continues).
Default:
.BR 1 .
.TP
.B QUANT_SHARD_SIZE
Shard size for
.BR save_quantized .
Default:
.BR 5GB .
.TP
.B QUANT_SAFETENSORS
Set to
.B 1
to save in safetensors format. Default:
.BR 1 .
.TP
.B SMOKE_TEST_MODE
Same as
.B \-\-smoke\-test
flag. Default:
.BR full .
.TP
.B WRITE_CHECKSUMS
Set to
.B 1
to write
.B FILES_SHA256.json
in the output. Default:
.BR 0 .
.TP
.B WRITE_WEIGHT_CHECKSUMS
Set to
.B 1
to include weight shard checksums (requires WRITE_CHECKSUMS=1). Default:
.BR 0 .
.TP
.B FINGERPRINT_INCLUDE_VERS
Set to
.B 1
to include torch/transformers/awq versions in the fingerprint. Default:
.BR 1 .
.TP
.B FINGERPRINT_INCLUDE_SYS
Set to
.B 1
to include host/system info in the fingerprint. Default:
.BR 0 .
.SH OUTPUT
Output is written to a content-addressed directory under
.BR QUANTIZED_OUTPUT_DIR .
The directory structure depends on
.BR WRITE_LOCAL_REPO_LAYOUT :
.PP
Plain layout (default, slashes in model ID are replaced with
.BR \-\- ):
.RS
.nf
$QUANTIZED_OUTPUT_DIR/<model-id-slug>-AWQ/<snapshot-hash>/
  config.json
  *.safetensors (or *.bin)
  tokenizer_config.json
  tokenizer.json (or tokenizer.model)
  awq_quantize_meta.json
  FINGERPRINT.json
  FILES_SHA256.json        (if WRITE_CHECKSUMS=1)
.fi
.RE
.PP
Cache-shaped layout (WRITE_LOCAL_REPO_LAYOUT=1):
.RS
.nf
$QUANTIZED_OUTPUT_DIR/hub/models--<model-id-slug>-AWQ/
  refs/<revision>
  snapshots/<snapshot-hash>/
    (same files as above)
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success, or output already exists and is complete.
.TP
.B 1
Error. Covers configuration errors (missing dependencies, CUDA unavailable,
lock busy, invalid bits/group-size), runtime failures, and smoke test
failures. The
.B die()
handler exits 1 for all bash-level errors.
.TP
.B 2
Missing required positional argument (no model-id provided).
.SH EXAMPLES
Quantize a model with default settings (4-bit, group-size 128):
.PP
.RS
.nf
quantize-awq meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B
.fi
.RE
.PP
Quantize to 3-bit with group-size 64 and JSON output:
.PP
.RS
.nf
quantize-awq --json meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B 3 64
.fi
.RE
.PP
Quantize with custom calibration settings:
.PP
.RS
.nf
AWQ_MAX_CALIB_SAMPLES=256 AWQ_MAX_CALIB_SEQ_LEN=4096 \\
  quantize-awq meta-llama/Llama-3.1-70B
.fi
.RE
.PP
Force re-quantization with checksums:
.PP
.RS
.nf
FORCE_REQUANTIZE=1 WRITE_CHECKSUMS=1 \\
  quantize-awq --smoke-test fast meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR quantize-fp8 (1),
.BR quantize-llmc (1),
.BR list-models (1)
